---
pagetitle: "NDScript: a minimal clairvoyant language"
shorttitle: NDScript
status: alpha
---
**Note:** This section is intended for people familiar with languages like Javascript and C.  If you're not a programmer, [skip to the next section](The_Step_language), which is written for all audiences.

NDScript is a tiny subset of Javascript with a clairvoyant statement called `choose` added.[^1]  We'll use it to experiment with very simple clairvoyant algorithms before moving on to the more complete [Step language](the_step_language).

## Decision-making in computers

When computers  "make decisions" it generally takes the form of something like an `if` statement.  There are elaborations on these: `switch` statements, `while` and `for` loops, etc.  But the basic pattern is:
```C
if (condition) {
    // Option 1
} else {
    // Option 2
}
```
The computer tests whether `condition` is true.  If so, it chooses option 1, otherwise option 2.  Nearly all programs have these.  But you have to be able to compute the `condition` before you can run the `if`:

> information → decision

But as we said, many problems only give you the information after you make the decision:

> decision → information

## Choice and failure

What if we could break apart the `condition` and the choices in the `if`, so that we could put the `condition` *later* in the program where we have the information we need?  That's the basic idea of clairvoyance (aka nondeterminism).  Rather than one `if` statement, we have separate `choose` and `fail` statements.  The `choose` statement looks like an if with no condition:
```ndscript
choose {
    // Option 1
} or {
    // Option 2
}
```
and the `fail` statement:
```ndscript
fail;
```
just states that some eariler choice was wrong.  The contract the system makes with you is that it will "never"[^2] make choices that lead to failure (executing the `fail` statement).  So if you write your program to always fail for bad answers, then the system will only make good choices.  This is the sense in which it is "clairvoyant."  

## Endnotes

[^1]: For "non-determinimistic scripting language."  It's [open source](https://github.com/ianhorswill/NDScript).  In principle, you could drop it into any game running on Unity, Godot, or MonoGame.  However, it's not intended to be industrial strength; it's pretty much purpose-built for the examples given here.  It's missing nicities like `switch` statements, `for` loops, autoincrement/decremeent, or (as of this writing) even simple things like objects.  So contact me before you try to use it in a real game and we can talk about what would be involved in making it better or converting it to C++.

[^2]: Of course, behind the scenes, it does make bad choices and it does fail.  It just hides those mistakes from you: it undoes mistakes and systematically tries choices until it finds a sequence of choices that succeeds (i.e. doesn't `fail`).  This can mean the program runs very slowly if it's making a lot of bad choices internally.  But the final result only shows the results of the good choices.