---
pagetitle: How matching works
status: alpha
---
In the `Give` example on the previous pages, we talked about calls matching or not matching methods, but we didn't explain how matching worked.  So let's say a little bit about that now.

A call matches a method if every part of the call --- the task and each of the parameters --- match the corresponding part of the method.  So for example, the call:
```step
[Give "Mary" "Jill" "a nice raise"]
```
Doesn't match the method:
```step
Hello ?who: Hello, who!
```
Both because the tasks are different (`Give`≠`Hello`), and because they have different numbers of parameters (three in the call, one in the method).

## Matching a single parameter

Parameters can either be specific values, like `7` or `"a nice raise"`, or variables like `?giver`.  In this code, the first two methods specify values for their parameters, and the last specifies a variable:

```step
Reflexive “Mr. Boss”: himself
Reflexive “Mary”: herself
Reflexive ?who: themself
```

Similarly, a call can specify either a value or a variable for the parameter.

### Matching values to values

When both the call and the method give specific values for a parameter, then they match only if they give the same value.  So the call
`[Reflexive "Mr. Boss"]` matches the first method above, but not the second.[^1]  And the call `[Reflexive "Mary"]` matches the second but not the first.

### Matching variables to values

When one specifies a variable and the other a value, they match.  However, the system **connects** that variable with that value: any subsequent uses of the variable will use that value instead.  So the call `[Reflexive "Mr. Boss"]` matches the third method above, but would connect the method's variable `?who` to the value `"Mr. Boss"`.

Note that the variable doesn't have to appear on the method side.  It can appear in the call instead.  If we do the call `[Reflexive ?x]`, it matches each of the above methods, but also **connects `?x` to the parameter in the chosen method**.  That gives programmers a way not only of calling a task with a parameter that means "I don't care which", but also find out what value was chosen.

### Matching variables to variables

Finally, it's possible for both the caller and the method to list a variable for the parameter, for example when we match the call `[Reflexive ?x]` to the method:
```step
Reflexive ?who: themself
```
When we do this, the match succeeds.  But rather than connecting the variables to a value, we **connect the variables to each other**.  Then, should we connect either to something else in the future, we will be connecting both. 


## Notes

[^1]: It also matches the third, but we'll talk about variables shortly.

[^2]: It turns out not to matter what order the matching is done in, however.  You can match the first parameter first, or you can match it last; you get the same answer regardless.