---
pagetitle: Structured data
status: alpha
---
To recap, we’ve discussed how Step executes calls to tasks --- both predicates and non-predicates --- by matching the parameters specified in the call to the parameters for the different methods of the task.  It tries a method when it can match each parameter in the call to its respective parameter in the method.

Thus far, all the values that have been passed along for parameters have been single pieces of data: a string, a variable, maybe a number.  But there are times when we want to pass something more complicated as the value of a parameter.  In effect, we want to package several data objects together as a single data object.  Step has two versions of these, **tuples** and **feature structures**.  We'll talk about each of these and give examples.

## Technical: comparison to other languages

Step data structures basically look like JSON objects except that:

* You use spaces instead of commas as separators
* You can put variables inside of them
* You can match them against other objects; this turns out to be very cool

Tuples in *Step* function like tuples in Python or arrays in C: they're ordered sequences of objects.  They're notated similarly to Python syntax, except you use square brackets instead of parentheses and spaces as separators instead of commas.

Although they originally come from [linguistics](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Feature_structure), feature structures are [dictionaries](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Associative_array), similar to the Python `dict` type or `Javascript` objects.  That is, they're unordered collections of key/value pairs.  Syntactically, they look like JSON notation, but again, with spaces as separators rather than commas.