---
pagetitle: Relationships (verbs)
status: alpha
---
Relationships between pairs of entities are expressed by verbs.  You can teach it about new relationships by telling it what kinds of entities the verb relates:
> *Noun* `can` *verb* `some` *noun*

You can put whatever nouns and verb you like, and again, the verb can consist of multiple words, such as:
```imaginarium
People can invest in some stocks.
```
This tells the system there’s a kind of entity, `person`, and another kind of entity, `stock`.  Moreover, `people` and `stocks` are related by the relation `invest in`.[^phrasal]  So there’s some set of people, and some set of stocks, and any given person may or may not be investing in that stock.  This leaves open the possibility for a given person to invest in many stocks or no stocks.  And similarly, for a stock to have many or no people investing in it.  So when you ask the system to imagine people and stocks, it will feel free to structure who’s investing in what (or not) completely randomly.

By contrast, if we change `some` to `one`: 
```imaginarium
People can invest in one stock.
```
It tells the system that people can’t invest in more than one stock.  And if we change `can` to `must`:
```imaginarium 
People must invest in one stock.
```
Then the system will make sure all people invest in exactly one stock.  Here’s a summary of what the different sentence patterns mean:

|Sentence pattern	|Meaning|
|------|--------|
|Subject can Verb some Objects	|Any subject can verb any object, but doesn’t have to.|
|Subject must Verb some Objects	|Every subject must verb at least one object.|
|Subject can Verb one Object	|Each subject can verb up to one object.|
|Subject must Verb one Object|	Each subject must verb exactly one object.|

You can also say things like `people must invest in two stocks` or `up to three stocks`, `at least four stocks`, etc.

## End notes

[^phrasal]: As with nouns, verbs in *Imaginarium* can be multiple words (phrasal verbs).